---
BIP: "0001"
title: BIP Purpose and Guidelines
status: Active
type: Organizational
author: David Aronchick <david.aronchick@protocol.ai> 
discussions-to: https://github.com/bacalhau-project/BIPs/issues/
created: 2022-06-15
---

## What is a BIP?

BIP stands for Bacalhau Improvement Proposal. A BIP is a design document providing information to the Bacalhau community, or describing a new feature for Bacalhau or its processes or environment. The BIP should provide a concise technical specification of the feature and a rationale for its adoption. The BIP author is responsible for building consensus within the community and documenting dissenting opinions.

## BIP Rationale

We intend BIPs to be the primary mechanisms for proposing new features, for collecting community technical input on an issue, and for documenting the design decisions that have gone into Bacalhau. Because the BIPs are maintained as text files in a versioned repository, their revision history is the historical record of the feature proposal.

However, we also require that, where appropriate, Technical BIPs are also reflected in the protocol's specification, which is the primary source of reference for other developers.

For Bacalhau implementers, BIPs are a convenient way to track the progress of their implementation. Ideally, each implementation maintainer would list the BIPs that they have implemented. This will give end users a convenient way to know the current status of a given implementation or library.

## BIP Types

There are three main types of BIPs:

1. A **Technical BIP** (Bacaalhu Technical Proposal or **BTP**) describes any change that affects most or all Bacalhau implementations, such as a change to the network protocol, a change in block or transaction validity rules, proposed application standards/conventions, or any change or addition that affects the interoperability of applications using Bacalhau. Technical BIPs consist of three parts: a design document, an implementation, and, if warranted, an update to the [formal specification](https://github.com/filecoin-project/bacalhau/specs). Furthermore, technical BIPs can be broken down into the following categories:
   - **Core** - improvements requiring a consensus upgrade, as well as changes that are not necessarily consensus critical but may be relevant to future consensus upgrades.
   - **Networking** - includes improvements to data propagation, or any of the Bacalhau network protocols.
   - **Interface** - includes improvements around client specifications and standards, and also certain language-level standards like method names.
   - **Informational** - describes a Bacalhau design issue, or provides general guidelines or information to the Bacalhau community, but does not propose a new feature. Informational FTPs do not necessarily represent Bacalhau community consensus or a recommendation, so users and implementers are free to ignore Informational FTPs or follow their advice.

2. An **Organizational BIP** (Bacalhau Organizational Proposal or **BOP**) describes a process surrounding Bacalhau or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process BIPs are like Standards Track BIPs but apply to areas other than the Bacalhau protocol itself. They may propose an implementation, but not to Bacalhau's codebase; they often require community consensus; unlike Informational BIPs, they are more than recommendations, and users are typically not free to ignore them. Examples include procedures, guidelines, changes to the decision-making process, changes to the BIP process, and changes to the tools or environment used in Bacalhau development.

3. A **Recovery BIP** (Bacalhau Recovery Proposal or **BRP**) proposes a state change that is necessary and that cannot be addressed using the standard protocol. FRPs are only valid under a limited, clearly-defined set of criteria (e.g., in the case of protocol bugs destroying network value). The FRP should describe the issue to be corrected, explain why an irregular state change is necessary and justified, and demonstrate that the proposed actions will achieve the FRP's objectives.

It is highly recommended that a single BIP contain a single key proposal or new idea. The more focused the BIP, the more successful it tends to be. A change to one client doesn't require a BIP; a change that affects multiple implementations, or defines a standard for multiple clients to use, does.

A BIP must meet certain minimum criteria. It must be a clear and complete description of the proposed enhancement. The enhancement must represent a net improvement. The proposed implementation, if applicable, must be solid and must not complicate the protocol unduly.

## BIP Work Flow

Parties involved in the process are you, the champion or *BIP author*, the [*BIP editors*](#BIP-editors), and the *Bacalhau Core Developers*.

:warning: Before you begin, vet your idea, this will save you time. Ask the Bacalahu community first if an idea is original to avoid wasting time on something that will be rejected based on prior research (searching the Internet does not always do the trick). It also helps to make sure the idea is applicable to the entire community and not just the author. Just because an idea sounds good to the author does not mean it will work for most people in most areas where Bacalhau is used. Examples of appropriate public forums to gauge interest around your BIP include [the Issues section of this repository](https://github.com/bacalhau-project/BIPs/issues), and [the Bacalhau Slack Channel](https://join.slack.com/t/filecoinproject/shared_invite/zt-1ayvizesh-07JNNx3oj1NV5QJ9yzptPw). In particular, [the Issues section of this repository](https://github.com/bacalhau-project/BIPs/issues) is an excellent place to discuss your proposal with the community and start creating more formalized language around your BIP.

Your role as the champion is to write the BIP using the style and format described below, shepherd the discussions in the appropriate forums, and build community consensus around the idea. Following is the process that a successful BIP will move along:

```
[ WIP ] -> [ DRAFT ] -> [ LAST CALL ] -> [ ACCEPTED ] -> [ FINAL ]
```

Each status change is requested by the BIP author and reviewed by the BIP editors. Use a pull request to update the status. Please include a link to where people should continue discussing your BIP. The BIP editors will process these requests as per the conditions below.

* **Active** -- Some Informational and Organizational BIPs may also have a status of “Active” if they are never meant to be completed. E.g. BIP-1 (this BIP).
* **Work in progress (WIP)** -- Once the champion has asked the Bacalhau community whether an idea has any chance of support, they will write a draft BIP as a [pull request](https://github.com/bacalhau-project/BIPs/pulls). Consider including an implementation if this will aid people in studying the BIP.
  * :arrow_right: Draft -- If agreeable, BIP editor will assign the BIP a number and merge your pull request. The BIP editor will not unreasonably deny a BIP.
  * :x: Draft -- Reasons for denying draft status include being too unfocused, too broad, duplication of effort, being technically unsound, not providing proper motivation or addressing backwards compatibility, or not in keeping with the [Bacalhau improvement principles](https://github.com/bacalhau-project/BIPs/blob/master/README.md).
* **Draft** -- After the first draft is merged, you may still submit follow-up pull requests with further changes until you believe the BIP to be mature and ready to proceed to the next status. A BIP in draft status must be implemented to be considered for promotion to the next status (ignore this requirement for core BIPs).
  * :arrow_right: Last Call -- If agreeable, the BIP editor will assign Last Call status and set a review end date (`review-period-end`), normally 14 days later.
  * :x: Last Call -- A request for Last Call status will be denied if material changes are still expected to be made to the draft. We hope that BIPs only enter Last Call once, so as to avoid unnecessary noise.
* **Last Call** -- This BIP will be listed prominently on the Bacalhau website
  * :x: -- A Last Call which results in material changes or substantial unaddressed technical complaints will cause the BIP to revert to Draft.
  * :arrow_right: Accepted (Core BIPs only) -- A successful Last Call without material changes or unaddressed technical complaints will become Accepted.
  * :arrow_right: Final (Not core BIPs) -- A successful Last Call without material changes or unaddressed technical complaints will become Final.
* **Accepted (Core BIPs only)** -- This BIP is in the hands of the Bacalhau implementation developers.  Their process for deciding whether to encode it into their clients as part of a consensus upgrade is not part of the BIP process.
  * :arrow_right: Final -- A Pull Request to the [Bacalhau Specification repository](https://github.com/bacalhau-project/specs) updating the text of the spec to describe the protocol changes should also be submitted before the BIP can proceed to the Final status. When the implementation is complete and adopted by the community, the status will be changed to “Final”.
* **Final** -- This BIP represents the current state-of-the-art. A Final BIP should only be updated to correct errata.

Other exceptional statuses include:

* **Deferred** -- This is for core BIPs that have been put off for a future consensus upgrade.
* **Rejected** -- A BIP that is fundamentally broken or a Core BIP that was rejected by the Core Devs and will not be implemented.
* **Active** -- This is similar to Final, but denotes a BIP which may be updated without changing its BIP number.
* **Superseded** -- A BIP which was previously final but is no longer considered state-of-the-art. Another BIP will be in Final status and reference the Superseded BIP.

## What belongs in a successful BIP?

Each BIP should have the following parts:

- Preamble - RFC 822 style headers containing metadata about the BIP, including the BIP number, a short descriptive title (limited to a maximum of 44 characters), and the author details. See [below](https://github.com/filecoin-project/BIPs/blob/master/BIPS/BIP-1.md#BIP-header-preamble) for details.
- Simple Summary - “If you can’t explain it simply, you don’t understand it well enough.” Provide a simplified and layman-accessible explanation of the BIP.
- Abstract - a short (~200 word) description of the technical issue being addressed.
- Motivation (*optional*) - The motivation is critical for BIPs that want to change the Bacalhau protocol. It should clearly explain why the existing protocol specification is inadequate to address the problem that the BIP solves. BIP submissions without sufficient motivation may be rejected outright.
- Specification - The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature or process. Technical specifications should be detailed enough to allow competing, interoperable implementations for any of the current Filecoin platforms.
- Rationale - The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular design decisions were made. It should describe alternate designs that were considered and related work, e.g. how the feature is supported in other languages. The rationale may also provide evidence of consensus within the community, and should discuss important objections or concerns raised during discussion.
- Backwards Compatibility - All BIPs that introduce backwards incompatibilities must include a section describing these incompatibilities and their severity. The BIP must explain how the author proposes to deal with these incompatibilities. BIP submissions without a sufficient backwards compatibility treatise may be rejected outright.
- Test Cases - Test cases for an implementation are mandatory for BIPs that are affecting consensus changes. Other BIPs can choose to include links to test cases if applicable.
- Security Considerations - All BIPs must contain a section that discusses the security implications/considerations relevant to the proposed change. Include information that might be important for security discussions, surfaces risks and can be used throughout the life cycle of the proposal. E.g. include security-relevant design decisions, concerns, important discussions, implementation-specific guidance and pitfalls, an outline of threats and risks and how they are being addressed. BIP submissions missing the "Security Considerations" section will be rejected. A BIP cannot proceed to status "Final" without a Security Considerations discussion deemed sufficient by the reviewers.
- Implementations - The implementations must be completed before any BIP is given status “Final”, but it need not be completed before the BIP is merged as draft. While there is merit to the approach of reaching consensus on the specification and rationale before writing code, the principle of “rough consensus and running code” is still useful when it comes to resolving many discussions of API details.
- Copyright Waiver - All BIPs must be in the public domain. See the bottom of this BIP for an example copyright waiver.

## BIP Formats and Templates

BIPs should be written in [markdown](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet) format.
Image files should be included in a subdirectory of the `assets` folder for that BIP as follow: `assets/BIP-X` (for BIP **X**). When linking to an image in the BIP, use relative links such as `../assets/BIP-X/image.png`.

## BIP Header Preamble

Each BIP must begin with an RFC 822 style header preamble, preceded and followed by three hyphens (`---`). The headers must appear in the following order. Headers marked with "*" are optional and are described below. All other headers are required.

` BIP:` \<BIP number\> (this is determined by the BIP editor)

` title:` \<BIP title\>

` author:` \<a list of the author's or authors' name(s) and/or username(s), or name(s) and email(s). Details are below.\>

` * discussions-to:` \<a url pointing to the official discussion thread\>

` status:` \<Draft | Last Call | Accepted | Final | Active | Deferred | Rejected | Superseded\>

`* review-period-end:` \<date review period ends\>

` type:` \<Technical (Core, Networking, Interface, BRC) | Organizational | Recovery\>

` * category:` \<Core | Networking | Interface | BRC\>

` created:` \<date created on\>

`spec-sections:` A list of Spec sections that the BIP is updating.

`spec-pr:` The URL for the PR updating the Spec.

` * updated:` \<comma separated list of dates\>

` * requires:` \<BIP number(s)\>

` * replaces:` \<BIP number(s)\>

` * superseded-by:` \<BIP number(s)\>

` * resolution:` \<a url pointing to the resolution of this BIP\>

Headers that permit lists must separate elements with commas.

Headers requiring dates will always do so in the format of ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd).

#### `author` header

The `author` header optionally lists the names, email addresses or usernames of the authors/owners of the BIP. Those who prefer anonymity may use a username only, or a first name and a username. The format of the author header value must be:

> Random J. User &lt;address@dom.ain&gt;

or

> Random J. User (@username)

if the email address or GitHub username is included, and

> Random J. User

if the email address is not given.

#### `resolution` header

The `resolution` header is required for Standards Track BIPs only. It contains a URL that should point to an email message or other web resource where the pronouncement about the BIP is made.

#### `discussions-to` header

While a BIP is a draft, a `discussions-to` header will indicate the mailing list or URL where the BIP is being discussed. As mentioned above, examples for places to discuss your BIP include the [the Bacalhau Slack Channel](https://join.slack.com/t/filecoinproject/shared_invite/zt-1ayvizesh-07JNNx3oj1NV5QJ9yzptPw) or an issue in this repo.

No `discussions-to` header is necessary if the BIP is being discussed privately with the author.

As a single exception, `discussions-to` cannot point to GitHub pull requests.

#### `type` header

The `type` header specifies the type of BIP: Technical, Organizational, or Recovery. If the track is Technical please include the subcategory (core, networking, interface, or informational).

#### `category` header

The `category` header specifies the BIP's category. This is required for technical BIPs only.

#### `created` header

The `created` header records the date that the BIP was assigned a number. Both headers should be in yyyy-mm-dd format, e.g. 2001-08-14.

#### `spec-sections`

Spec sections that the BIP is updating, each section has an ID that can be found in the Spec website under each section "three dot" menu.

Example:
```yaml 
spec-sections:
  - section-intro
  - section-libraries.libp2p
  ```

#### `updated` header

The `updated` header records the date(s) when the BIP was updated with "substantional" changes. This header is only valid for BIPs of Draft and Active status.

#### `requires` header

BIPs may have a `requires` header, indicating the BIP numbers that this BIP depends on.

#### `superseded-by` and `replaces` headers

BIPs may also have a `superseded-by` header indicating that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by a later document; the value is the number of the BIP that replaces the current document. The newer BIP must have a `replaces` header containing the number of the BIP that it rendered obsolete.

## Auxiliary Files

BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams. Such files must be named BIP-XXXX-Y.ext, where “XXXX” is the BIP number, “Y” is a serial number (starting at 1), and “ext” is replaced by the actual file extension (e.g. “png”).

## Transferring BIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of BIPs to a new champion. In general, we'd like to retain the original author as a co-author of the transferred BIP, but that's really up to the original author. A good reason to transfer ownership is because the original author no longer has the time or interest in updating it or following through with the BIP process, or has fallen off the face of the 'net (i.e. is unreachable or isn't responding to email). A bad reason to transfer ownership is because you don't agree with the direction of the BIP. We try to build consensus around a BIP, but if that's not possible, you can always submit a competing BIP.

If you are interested in assuming ownership of a BIP, send a message asking to take over, addressed to both the original author and the BIP editor. If the original author doesn't respond to email in a timely manner, the BIP editor will make a unilateral decision (which can be reversed).

## BIP Editors

The current BIP editors are

* David Aronchick (@aronchick)

## BIP Editor Responsibilities

For each new BIP that comes in, an editor does the following:

- Read the BIP to check if it is ready: sound and complete. The ideas must make technical sense, even if they don't seem likely to get to final status.
- The title should accurately describe the content.
- Check the BIP for language (spelling, grammar, sentence structure, etc.), markup (GitHub flavored Markdown), code style

If the BIP isn't ready, the editor will send it back to the author for revision, with specific instructions.

Once the BIP is ready for the repository, the BIP editor will:

- Assign a BIP number (generally the PR number or, if preferred by the author, the Issue # if there was discussion in the Issues section of this repository about this BIP)

- Merge the corresponding pull request

- Check whether the BIP needs to be accompanied by an update to the specification and if so, make sure that a PR to spec repository has been submitted and that the text that updates the spec is reflecting the changes that the BIP proposes.

- Send a message back to the BIP author with the next step.

Many BIPs are written and maintained by developers with write access to the Filecoin codebase. The BIP editors monitor BIP changes, and correct any structure, grammar, spelling, or markup mistakes we see.

The editors don't pass judgment on BIPs. They merely do the administrative & editorial part.

## History

This document was derived heavily from [Filecoin's FIP-1](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/master/FIPS/fip-0001.md) written by WhyAreYouSleeping,  [Ethereum's EIP-1](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs) written by Martin Becze and Hudson Jameson, which was derived from [Bitcoin's BIP-0001](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips) written by Amir Taaki, which in turn was derived from [Python's PEP-0001](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/). In many places text was simply copied and modified. The authors of the previous texts on which this process is based are not responsible for the Bacalhau Improvement Process and should not be bothered with questions. Please direct all comments to the BIP editors.

## Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
